ref(AM): Make theory explanations clearer, merge in glossary (#1667)
getsentry/sentry-docs: src/collections/_documentation/performance/distributed-tracing.md

    level="warning"
%}

> Enabling tracing augments your existing error data by capturing interactions among your software systems. With tracing, Sentry tracks metrics about your software performance, like throughput and latency, as well as displays the impact of errors across multiple systems. Tracing makes Sentry a more complete monitoring solution, helping you both diagnose problems and measure your application's overall health more easily. Tracing in Sentry provides insights such as:

Reviewer: Agreed.

> Enabling tracing augments your existing error data by capturing interactions among your software systems. With tracing, Sentry tracks metrics about your software performance, like throughput and latency, as well as displays the impact of errors across multiple systems. Tracing makes Sentry a more complete monitoring solution, helping you both diagnose problems and measure your application's overall health more easily. Tracing in Sentry provides insights such as:

Author: Changed it to `With tracing, Sentry tracks your software performance, measuring things like throughput and latency, and can also display the impact of errors across multiple systems.`

Does that work, @bruno-garcia?

The only other mentions of "metrics" are in the "Performance Metrics" section. Are we good with those?

> Enabling tracing augments your existing error data by capturing interactions among your software systems. With tracing, Sentry tracks metrics about your software performance, like throughput and latency, as well as displays the impact of errors across multiple systems. Tracing makes Sentry a more complete monitoring solution, helping you both diagnose problems and measure your application's overall health more easily. Tracing in Sentry provides insights such as:

Reviewer 2: Sounds great, thanks @lobsterkatie !

> Enabling tracing augments your existing error data by capturing interactions among your software systems. With tracing, Sentry tracks metrics about your software performance, like throughput and latency, as well as displays the impact of errors across multiple systems. Tracing makes Sentry a more complete monitoring solution, helping you both diagnose problems and measure your application's overall health more easily. Tracing in Sentry provides insights such as:

Author: 👍🏻

- What occurred for a specific error event or issue
- The conditions that cause bottlenecks or latency issues in your application
- The endpoints or operations that consume the most time

## What is Tracing?

> To begin, a note about what tracing is not: Tracing is not profiling. Though the goals of profiling and tracing overlap quite a bit, and though they are both tools which can be used to diagnose problems in your application, they differ both in terms of what they measure and how the data is recorded.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To begin, a note about what tracing is not: Tracing is not profiling. Though the goals of profiling and tracing overlap quite a bit, and can be used to diagnose problems in your application, they differ both in terms of what they measure and how the data is recorded.
```

I found the double though awkward. Feel free to ignore if you disagree.

Author: I think it works to take out the second "though" if we also get rid of the first comma. (Otherwise, the first "though" still reads to me like it's only modifying the first idea, not both ideas.)

Changed it to `Though the goals of profiling and tracing overlap quite a bit and they can both be used to diagnose problems in your application, they differ both in terms of what they measure and how the data is recorded.`

Author: And... changed it back, because it just sounded weird. I kept your tightening up of the language, though - I do think it's better.

A [profiler](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Profiling_(computer_programming)) may measure any number of aspects of an application's operation: the number of instructions executed, the amount of memory being used by various processes, the amount of time a given function call takes, and many more. The resulting profile is a statistical summary of these measurements. 

> A [tracing tool](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tracing_(software)), on the other hand, focuses on _what_ happened (and when), rather than how many times it happened or how long it took. The resulting trace is log of events which occurred during a program's execution, often across multiple systems. Though traces most often - or, in the case of Sentry's traces, always - include timestamps, allowing durations to be calculated, measuring performance is not their only purpose. They can also show the ways in which interconnected systems interact, and the ways in which problems in one can cause problems in another.

Author: Damn. And Fiona and I _both_ proofread this, multiple times! Just shows why fresh eyes are so important!

Fixed.

> A [tracing tool](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tracing_(software)), on the other hand, focuses on _what_ happened (and when), rather than how many times it happened or how long it took. The resulting trace is log of events which occurred during a program's execution, often across multiple systems. Though traces most often - or, in the case of Sentry's traces, always - include timestamps, allowing durations to be calculated, measuring performance is not their only purpose. They can also show the ways in which interconnected systems interact, and the ways in which problems in one can cause problems in another.

Author: We do actually define "distributed trace" in the first paragraph of the "Traces, Transactions, and Spans" section. My feeling here is that the less detail, the better, since this is meant to be a very high-level overview of what tracing is - really only defining it enough to show why it's not profiling. Vocabulary can come later. 🙁

### Why Tracing?

Applications typically consist of interconnected components, which are also called services. As an example, let's look at a modern web application, composed of the following components, separated by network boundaries:

> - Front End (Single-Page Application)

Author: Yeah, it's a good question. We should definitely be consistent, whatever we do.

@PeloWriter - your call what we standardize to.

> - Front End (Single-Page Application)

Reviewer 4: Per our handy-dandy Style Guide, it's frontend and backend.

> - Front End (Single-Page Application)

Author: ✔️

In our example web application, tracing means being able to follow a request from the front end to the backend and back, pulling in data from any background tasks or notification jobs that request creates. Not only does this allow you to correlate Sentry error reports, to see how an error in one service may have propagated to another, but it also allows you to gain stronger insights into which services may be having a negative impact on your application's overall performance.

Before learning how to enable tracing in your application, it helps to understand a few key terms and how they relate to one another.

### Traces, Transactions, and Spans

A **trace** represents the record of the entire operation you want to measure or track - like page load, an instance of a user completing some action in your application, or a cron job in your backend. When a trace includes work in multiple services, such as those listed above, it's called a **distributed trace**, because the trace is distributed across those services. To recap, a trace is a record of an operation; a distributed trace is a record of an operation that's distributed across services.

> Each trace consists of one or more tree-like structures called **transactions**, the nodes of which are called **spans**. In most cases, each transaction represents a single instance of a service being called, and each span within that transaction represents that service performing a single unit of work, whether calling a function within that service or making a call to a different service.

Reviewer: @lobsterkatie at this point, would it be obvious that the trace itself is a *tree of transactions*? And ultimately a trace is a tree of spans.

Author: Hmmm, interesting. I totally see your point - as long as there are no orphan transactions, every trace _is_ a tree - but the only time you see all of a trace's transactions together is as a list, when you search by trace id. Perhaps that's going to change, though? I think you said you're working on a trace view, yes?

But to answer your question, no, I don't think it's necessarily obvious, because until you just pointed it out, I hadn't sat down and put 2 and 2 and 2 together to think of it that way - and I've been eating, breathing, and sleeping this stuff for two weeks now! Now that you say it, of course, it does seem obvious, but that's not how either the previous version of the docs nor this version were/are presenting it. (Our diagrams, too, only show one path in the trace tree, rather than a branching structure.)

Is this a crucial point that needs to be addressed now, before this goes out, or do you think it could be made into an Asana task for further revisions of this doc?

Reviewer: > Hmmm, interesting. I totally see your point - as long as there are no orphan transactions, every trace _is_ a tree - but the only time you see all of a trace's transactions together is as a list, when you search by trace id. Perhaps that's going to change, though? I think you said you're working on a trace view, yes?

There's no concrete plans to build this trace view just yet. 

Searching by trace id is the best representation we provide on the product side.

 
> Is this a crucial point that needs to be addressed now, before this goes out, or do you think it could be made into an Asana task for further revisions of this doc?

It can be crucial. The tree of transactions is somewhat unique to Sentry compared to other tracing tools. 

The fan out becomes obvious from browser JS transactions to Python transactions by way of API calls.

Author: Right - JS-> server via XHR, or server -> DB via queries. If we're going to make this point, though, in the absence of any tree-y thing in the product, I think we really need to illustrate it in the docs, especially since folks easily might be missing parts of the tree when they go to try to see it live (either because they're on Team or because they don't have the right permissions), so trying to take the list and turn it into a tree in their mind could be doubly hard. 

So how about this? If it's an important point we want to get out there, I don't feel like we can do it justice right now. So I'm going to make an Asana task. But I'll also see where I can sneak in a sentence or two now as well.

> Because a transaction has a tree structure, top-level spans can themselves be broken down into smaller spans, mirroring the way that one function may call a number of other, smaller functions; this is expressed using the parent-child metaphor, so that every span may be the **parent span** to multiple other spans. Further, since all trees must have a single root, one span always represents the transaction itself, and all other spans are descendants of that root span.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because a transaction has a tree structure, top-level spans can themselves be broken down into smaller spans, mirroring the way that one function may call a number of other, smaller functions; this is expressed using the parent-child metaphor, so that every span may be the **parent span** to multiple other spans. Further, since all trees must have a single root, this one span always represents the transaction itself, and all other spans are descendants of that root span.
```

Author: I don't think this works, because we haven't introduced a particular span yet - only made statements about spans in general.

However, perhaps it's clearer to say, "Further, since all trees must have a single root, one span in a transaction always represents the transaction itself, with all other spans in the transaction descending from that root span."

To make all of this more concrete, let's consider our example web app again.

### Example: Investigating Slow Page Load

> Suppose your web application is slow to load, and you'd like to know why. A lot has to happen for your app to first get to a usable state: multiple requests to your backend, likely some work - including calls to your database or to outside APis - completed before responses are returned, and processing by the browser to render all of the returned data into something meaningful to the user. So which part of that process is slowing things down?

Author: ✔️

^
- _Backend_
  - 3 requests to serve static files (the HTML, CSS, and JS)
  - 2 requests for JSON data
    - 1 requiring a call to the database 
    - 1 requiring a call to an external API and work to process the results before returning them to the front end
^
- _Database Server_
  - 1 request which requires 2 queries
    - 1 query to check authentication 
    - 1 query to get data
  
_Note:_ The external API is not listed precisely because it's external, and you therefore can't see inside of it.

In this example, the entire page-loading process, including all of the above, is represented by a single **trace**. That trace would consist of the following **transactions**:

- 1 browser transaction (for page load)
- 5 backend transactions (one for each request)
- 1 database server transaction (for the single DB request)
  
Each transaction would be broken down into **spans** as follows:

- _Browser Page-load Transaction_: 7 spans
  - 1 root span representing the entire page load
  - 1 span each (3 total) for the HTML, CSS, and JS requests
  - 1 span for the rendering task, which itself contains
    - 2 child spans, one for each JSON request

> Let's pause here to make an important point: Some, though not all, of the browser transaction spans listed have a direct correspondence to backend transactions listed earlier. Specifically, each request _span_ in the browser transaction corresponds to a separate request _transaction_ in the backend. In this situation, when a span in one service gives rise to a transaction in a subsequent service, we call the original span a parent span to _both_ the transaction and its root span.

Author: Good noticing. We should definitely be consistent, whatever we do.

@PeloWriter, this is your call. What say you?

> Let's pause here to make an important point: Some, though not all, of the browser transaction spans listed have a direct correspondence to backend transactions listed earlier. Specifically, each request _span_ in the browser transaction corresponds to a separate request _transaction_ in the backend. In this situation, when a span in one service gives rise to a transaction in a subsequent service, we call the original span a parent span to _both_ the transaction and its root span.

Reviewer 4: Colons are tricky. The first word after a colon is sometimes capitalized if it begins a complete sentence. I'd capitalize in this instance.

> Let's pause here to make an important point: Some, though not all, of the browser transaction spans listed have a direct correspondence to backend transactions listed earlier. Specifically, each request _span_ in the browser transaction corresponds to a separate request _transaction_ in the backend. In this situation, when a span in one service gives rise to a transaction in a subsequent service, we call the original span a parent span to _both_ the transaction and its root span.

Author: ✔️

> In our example, every transaction other than the initial browser page-load transaction is the child of a span in another service, which means that every root span other than the browser transaction root has a parent span (albeit in a different service). In a fully-instrumented system (one in which every service has tracing enabled) this pattern will always hold true: _the only parentless span will be the root of the initial transaction, and of the remaining parented spans, every one will live in the same service as its parent, except for the root spans, whose parents will live in a previous service_. This is worth noting because it is the one way in which transactions are not perfect trees - their roots can (and mostly do) have parents.

Author: Reworded the sentence to break it up. I ❤️ complex sentences, but they're not always the best option for clarity.

As to paragraphs being one line/many lines: I think I would feel better about that if we had tooling to rewrap automatically (which we don't, to my knowledge). IMHO GitHub should just fix their diff rendering. 😁  (Because I agree, it's a pain that you have to separately call out the change.)

  - 1 root span representing the entire request (child of a browser span)
^
- _Backend Request with DB Call Transaction_: 2 spans
  - 1 root span representing the entire request (child of a browser span)
  - 1 span for querying the database (parent of the database server transaction)
^
- _Backend Request with API Call Transaction_: 3 spans
  - 1 root span representing the entire request (child of a browser span)
  - 1 span for the API request (unlike with the DB call, _not_ a parent span, since the API is external)
  - 1 span for processing the API data
^
- _Database Server Request Transaction_: 3 spans
  - 1 root span representing the entire request (child of the backend span above)
  - 1 span for the authentication query
  - 1 span for the query retrieving data

To wrap up the example: after instrumenting all of your services, you might discover that - for some reason - it's the auth query in your database server that is making things slow, accounting for more than half of the time it takes for your entire page load process to complete. Tracing can't tell you _why_ that's happening, but at least now you know where to look!

> `[kmclb: working w Sami on updating the illustrations to match this example. Keeping the link below just to have the example of how to format the markdown]`

Author: I was doing this intentionally so they'd be pink and therefore super obvious when you build the doc, but you're right, regular comment syntax would be safer.

[{% asset performance/tracing-diagram.png alt="Diagram illustrating how a trace is composed of multiple transactions." %}]({% asset performance/tracing-diagram.png @path %})
  
### Further Examples

This section contains a few more examples of tracing, broken down into transactions and spans.

**Measuring a Specific User Action**

> If your application involves e-commerce, you likely want to measure the time between a user clicking "Submit Order" and the order confirmation appearing, including tracking the submitting of the charge to the payment processor and the sending of an order confirmation email. That entire process is one trace, and typically you'd have transactions (_T_) and spans (_S_) for:

Author: Ah, yeah. Good catch! In an earlier incarnation, these examples looked this this:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/14812505/81416589-c4702c00-90fe-11ea-87d9-dac8316e78e8.png)

and so I left out the root spans because the listed spans were just examples, and not meant to be an exhaustive list. But I felt like it was hard to read, so I reformatted it, but lost track of the fact that the idea of them being examples was lost in the process. Will fix. Thanks for catching this!

> If your application involves e-commerce, you likely want to measure the time between a user clicking "Submit Order" and the order confirmation appearing, including tracking the submitting of the charge to the payment processor and the sending of an order confirmation email. That entire process is one trace, and typically you'd have transactions (_T_) and spans (_S_) for:

Author: Okay, how does this look?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/14812505/81419823-bb358e00-9103-11ea-8028-343436122339.png)

> If your application involves e-commerce, you likely want to measure the time between a user clicking "Submit Order" and the order confirmation appearing, including tracking the submitting of the charge to the payment processor and the sending of an order confirmation email. That entire process is one trace, and typically you'd have transactions (_T_) and spans (_S_) for:

Reviewer 5: Perfect

- The browser's full process (_T_)
  - XHR request to backend\* (_S_)
  - Rendering confirmation screen (_S_)

> ^

Author: It enforces each list being a separate "block," so that there's space between them.

https://kramdown.gettalong.org/syntax.html#eob-marker

> ^

Reviewer 5: Ah, I should have noticed `_config.yaml`:

```yaml
markdown: kramdown
```

Too many "almost markdown" formats and renderers!!

> - Your backend's processing of that request

Author: Yup, caught that when I was fixing the above. Thanks.

  - Processing function (_S_)
  - Call to caching service\* (_S_)
  - API call to internal service\* (_S_)
^
- The work done in your caching service (_T_)
  - Checking cache for existing data (_S_)
  - Storing new data in cache (_S_)
^
- Your internal service's processing of the request (_T_)
  - Anything that service might do to handle the request (_S_)
  
_Note:_ Starred spans represent spans that are the parent of a later transaction (and its root span).
  
### Tracing Data Model

> "Show me your flowchart and conceal your tables, and I shall continue to be mystified. Show me your tables, and I won't usually need your flowchart; it'll be obvious." 
>
> -- [Fred Brooks](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fred_Brooks), The Mythical Man Month (1975)

While the theory is interesting, ultimately any data structure is defined by the kind of data it contains, and relationships between data structures are defined by how links between them are recorded. Traces, transactions, and spans are no different.

**Traces**

Traces are not an entity in and of themselves. Rather, a trace is defined as the collection of all transactions that share a `trace_id` value. 

> **Transactions**

Reviewer 6: Note: Once we have the docs written for the Transaction Payload in our develop docs we should cross link this. https://github.com/getsentry/develop/pull/25

Author: I'd be in favor of linking to this from the developer docs, so that people adding AM to SDKs know the API layer to build on top of their implementation, but I'm not sure we want to link to the payload schema here. That feels like an implementation detail, whereas this is more of a, "But what does it all _mean_?" kind of section.

Transactions share most of their properties (start and end time, tags, and so forth) with their root spans, so the same options described below for spans are available in transactions, and setting them in either place is equivalent.

> Transactions also have one additional property not included in spans, called `transaction_name`, which is used in the UI to identify the transaction. Common examples of `transaction_name` values include endpoint paths (like `/store/checkout/` or `api/v2/users/&lt;user_id&gt;/`) for backend request transactions, task names (like `data.cleanup.delete_inactive_users`) for cron job transactions, and URLs (like `https://docs.sentry.io/performance/distributed-tracing/`) for page-load transactions.

Reviewer 6: This is good and makes it more clear, we need to update our SDKs so it's called `transaction_name`.

Author: Yup, it's on my list! 🙂

**Spans**

The majority of the data in a transaction resides in the individual spans the transaction contains. Span data includes:

> - `parent_span_id`: ties the span to its parent span

Reviewer 6: Note: Similar to the above
I would like to have the payload and fields describe in one page: 
https://github.com/getsentry/develop/pull/25

Author: 👍🏻

> - `op`: short string identifying the type of operation the span is measuring

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `op`: short string identifying the type or category of operation the span is measuring
```
Might be helpful for some readers 🤷

Author: ✔️

- `start_timestamp`: when the span was opened
- `end_timestamp`: when the span was closed

> - `description`: longer description of the span's operation, often specific to that instance (optional)

Reviewer 7: Per the discussion in #discuss-backend, I think this should be changed to NOT be specific to an instance of a span.

"Longer description of the span's operation, that uniquely identifies the span and is consistent across instances of the span."

Author: Hmmm - maybe we mean different things by "specific to the instance," or maybe we're not following that advice ourselves.

Here's a transaction in our org:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/14812505/81462595-8f002880-9168-11ea-84df-97e3ab186da4.png)

The transaction name definitely does what you're saying, in that only that endpoint has that transaction name ("uniquely identifies") but every time someone hits that endpoint, the transaction has the same name set ("consistent across instances").

But here's a span in that transaction:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/14812505/81576562-4067af80-935d-11ea-8a94-6b0b4deb65df.png)

By my reading, this _isn't_ "consistent across instances," in that it's got the specific link in there, rather than something like `link https://s1.sentry-cdn.com/_static/<hash>/sentry/dist/sentry.css` or even `link https://<cdn host>/_static/<hash>/sentry/dist/sentry.css` (in case we ever end up distributing CDNs around the world).

Before I change any language in the doc, I first want to make sure we're talking about the same thing.

- `status`: short code indicating operation's status (optional)
- `tags`: key-value pairs holding additional data about the span (optional)
- `data`: arbitrarily-structured additional data about the span (optional)

> An example use of the `op` and `description` properties together is `op: sql.query` and `description: SELECT * FROM users WHERE last_active < DATE_SUB(CURRENT_DATE, INTERVAL 1 YEAR)`. The `status` property is often used to indicate the success or failure of the span's operation, or for a response code in the case of HTTP requests. Finally, `tags` and `data` allow you attach further contextual information to the span, such as `function: middleware.auth.is_authenticated` for a function call or `request: {url: ..., headers: ... , body: ...}` for an HTTP request.

Author: 1. Great!
2. ✔️
3. I checked and you're correct - neither `description` nor `data` are indexed/searchable. For the level of detail we have right now, I'm not sure getting into that is worth it, but I have a ticket to expand the naming guidance, so I think it could be rolled into that. Have added it there to work on.

> An example use of the `op` and `description` properties together is `op: sql.query` and `description: SELECT * FROM users WHERE last_active < DATE_SUB(CURRENT_DATE, INTERVAL 1 YEAR)`. The `status` property is often used to indicate the success or failure of the span's operation, or for a response code in the case of HTTP requests. Finally, `tags` and `data` allow you attach further contextual information to the span, such as `function: middleware.auth.is_authenticated` for a function call or `request: {url: ..., headers: ... , body: ...}` for an HTTP request.

Reviewer 7: This example is fine as is, but I think if would be useful to highlight that the description should be consistent across instances.
I changed the description to have a placeholder, and added an example of where to put the instance specific value in tags.

```suggestion
An example use of the `op` and `description` properties together is `op: sql.query` and `description: SELECT * FROM users WHERE id = ?`. The `status` property is often used to indicate the success or failure of the span's operation, or for a response code in the case of HTTP requests. Finally, `tags` and `data` allow you attach further contextual information to the span, such as `user_id:  1123` in the example above,  `function: middleware.auth.is_authenticated` for a function call or `request: {url: ..., headers: ... , body: ...}` for an HTTP request.
```

Author: See my question above. I admit that here, specifically with DB queries, we are doing exactly what you say (holy cow, that's a lot of placeholders!): 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/14812505/81578186-4e1e3480-935f-11ea-943c-ccb73126a745.png)

So in general I want to describe whatever the best practice is accurately, but first I want to be sure I'm clear on what it is!

Reviewer 7: I'll just answer your question here: Yes we are talking about the same thing when we talk about "consistent across instances". Your example of the transaction name is a good one. You can have many traces of the same transaction, but the transaction name will always be the same. The span description should work the same way. So in your example above, with the `s1.sentry-cdn.com` link, that is a BAD example. The idea is that if I open two different traces in two different browser tabs, the op/description of the spans should be the same.

Author: Okay, noted.  (I'll let _you_ go tell that to whoever sat that up, LOL.)

Took your edit of the `description` description. I kept the overall idea of my query (just because it calls back to one of the examples above), but genericized it to `description: SELECT * FROM users WHERE last_active < %s`. LMK if that still sounds off to you.

  
### Further Information

> A few more important points about traces, transactions, and spans, and the way they relate to one another:

Author: Oxford commas FTW!

I can't find the real version, but from the draft of our style guide:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/14812505/81422549-f2a63980-9107-11ea-86ba-49ddcb0564ee.png)

> **Trace Duration**

Author: If our `###` and `####` headers weren't nearly indistinguishable...

Lemme ping Cameron to see if that’s something he'd be willing to address.

> **Trace Duration**

Author: Yeah - that explains it:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/14812505/81435785-42433000-911d-11ea-93d5-5afda2156689.png)

`####` is 96% as big as `###`.

> **Trace Duration**

Reviewer 5: It should be much easier to fix CSS than to fix missing markup after the fact 😉

> **Trace Duration**

Author: Discussion of this moved to Slack. Under the assumption that we'll find _some_ solution, I'll switch these to real headings.

> Because a trace just is a collection of transactions, traces don't have their own start and end times. Instead, a trace begins when its earliest transaction starts, and ends when its latest transaction ends. As a result, you can't explicitly start or end a trace directly. Instead, you create a trace by creating the first transaction in that trace, and you complete a trace by completing all of transactions it contains.

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense to reverse?

```suggestion
Because a trace is just a collection of transactions, traces don't have their own start and end times. Instead, a trace begins when its earliest transaction starts, and ends when its latest transaction ends. As a result, you can't explicitly start or end a trace directly. Instead, you create a trace by creating the first transaction in that trace, and you complete a trace by completing all of transactions it contains.
```

Author: 🤔

Not to my ear.

The difference is subtle, and thinking about it is harder because "to be" is the exception to every rule (except when it isn't, or when it sometimes is and sometimes isn't). But if we take some other examples...

"I just can't make up my mind" (no matter how hard I try) vs "I can't just make up my mind" (I also have to act on it)

"He just vacuumed the hall" (so please take off your shoes) vs "he vacuumed just the hall" (even though he was supposed to do the bedrooms, too)

"She just took the cookie" (and didn't even say thanks) vs "she took just the cookie" (and left the brownie for me)

"The cow just ate grass" (and didn't do anything else all day) vs "the cow ate just grass" (even though most cows also like... actually, wait, what do cows like?)

"Just stand there" (don't move) vs "stand just there" (not a foot to the left or the right)

Anyway, you get the point. When the "just" comes before the verb, it modifies the verb, whether to emphasize it ("I just can't" = "I really really can't") or to restrict it ("just stand" = "do nothing but stand") or to place it in time ("just vacuumed" = "finished vacuuming very recently").

When it comes after, it modifies whatever else is in the sentence, whether to restrict it "just grass" = "nothing else besides grass") or to make it more precise ("just there" = "exactly there").

Circling back around... "is" is weird, and so only some of the meanings of "just" could even apply to it. The fact that none of those meanings really make sense here is I think why "just is a collection" sounds strange to me. "Just a collection," on the other hand, is no different than any of the other examples above.

(And now I will stop grammar-nerd-ing at you, I promise! 😛 )

**Async Transactions**

> Because of the possibility of asynchronous processes, child transactions may outlive the transactions containing their parent spans, sometimes by many orders of magnitude. For example, if a backend API call sets off a long-running processing task and then immediately returns a response, the backend transaction will finish (and its data will be sent to Sentry) long before the async task transaction does. Asynchronicity also means that the order in which transactions are sent to (and received by) Sentry does not in any way depend on the order in which they were created. (By contrast, order of receipt for transactions in the same trace _is_ correlated with order of completion, though because of factors like the variability of transmission times, the correlation is far from perfect.)

Author: 🙏

**Nested Spans**

Though our examples above had four levels in their hierarchy (trace, transaction, span, child span) there's no set limit to how deep the nesting of spans can go. There are, however, practical limits: transaction payloads sent to Sentry have a maximum allowed size, and as with any kind of logging, there's a balance to be struck between your data's granularity and its usability. 

**Zero-duration Spans**

It's possible for a span to have equal start and end times, and therefore be recorded as taking no time. This can occur either because the span is being used as a marker (such as is done in [the browser's Performance API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Performance/mark)) or because the amount of time the operation took is less than the measurement resolution (which will vary by service).

> **Clock Skew**

Author: Thanks! 😊 

As for the timestamps:

Even in the most manual cases of users collecting their own spans, my understanding is that the start and end timestamps are still "private" fields. In other words, I would think that the only ways for this to happen are for the computer's clock to be running backwards (unlikely, but you never know...), or for users to muck with the data in `beforeSend` (at which point it's on them, IMHO).

Are there languages where you can anticipate that not being the case, though? Where we'll be forced to have users set the timestamps themselves, rather than relying on whatever that language's version of `DateTime.now()` is? If so... then I'm still not sure it's not too much in the weeds, but I'd be willing to be convinced. 😛

> **Clock Skew**

Reviewer 5: > my understanding is that the start and end timestamps are still "private" fields

Hmm, neither Python nor JS are good examples because nothing is really private in those languages. And that's where we have transactions so far.

Sometimes it is interesting that those fields are public and settable -- consider when the measurement was done by some external process and you want to add a Span to the transaction. That's exactly what Abhijeet is working on now, a OpenTelemetry exporter. It will construct Sentry spans setting start and end times coming from another OTel-compatible system.

> I would think that the only ways for this to happen are for the computer's clock to be running backwards (unlikely, but you never know...)

That's the very reason I went on to retrofit using monotonic clocks in both the Python and JS SDKs... Computer clocks are not a perfect mathematical model.

`datetime.now()` and `new Date()` are NOT monotonic, they can and do change, including moving backwards and forwards by arbitrary amounts.

Try changing your computer clock in the middle of a span by going back to 2019. And before we say "users will not do that", the OS itself can change the clock in response to NTP, bad hardware clock, etc. VMs are also known to have clock skew problems (and they are heavily used in "the cloud", where everyone's code runs).

> Are there languages where you can anticipate that not being the case, though? 

Not all languages have a monotonic clock available.
Even our current Python implementation doesn't use a monotonic clock today on Python 2.x. So it could happen "by accident".

I agree with you that SDKs should handle this as much as they can and perhaps this doesn't need to be documented, or at least not now. I saw the other topics, thought about  this timestamp precondition and commented here.

Could also end up in the more technical SDK development docs, if not there already.

> **Clock Skew**

Author: Man, TIL. Time really _can_ flow backwards!

And yeah, it's true that neither Python nor JS have truly private fields, i.e., we can't enforce users not setting the data if they're determined to do so. I tend to have less sympathy for people who actively work against the given API, but you raise valid points about the possibility of the timestamps being wrong even if the SDK sets them.

Nothing is ever simple, is it? Someday I will learn...

In any case, given all of the above, I think you're right, we should document it, but I do think the developer docs are probably(?) a better place. @HazAT, what do you think?

> **Clock Skew**

Author: Talked to @HazAT offline - we will mention the "you gotta begin before you end" bit in the dev docs.

> If you are collecting transactions from multiple machines, you will likely encounter **clock skew**, where timestamps in one transaction don't align with timestamps in another. For example, if your backend makes a database call, the backend transaction logically should start before the database transaction does. But if the system time on each machine (those hosting your backend and database, respectively) isn't synced to common standard, it's possible that won't be the case. It's also possible for the ordering to be correct, but for the two recorded timeframes to not line up in a way that accurately reflects what actually happened.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you are collecting transactions from multiple machines, you will likely encounter **clock skew**, where timestamps in one transaction don't align with timestamps in another. For example, if your backend makes a database call, the backend transaction logically should start before the database transaction does. But if the system time on each machine (those hosting your backend and database, respectively) isn't synced to a common standard, it's possible that won't be the case. It's also possible for the ordering to be correct, but for the two recorded timeframes to not line up in a way that accurately reflects what actually happened.
```

Author: ✔️

> Because there is no way for Sentry to judge either the relative or absolute accuracy of your timestamps, it does not attempt to correct for this. And while you can reduce clock skew by using Network Time Protocol (NTP) or your cloud provider's clock synchronization services, you may still notice small discrepancies in your data, as synchronizing clocks on small intervals is challenging.

Author: @HazAT and I talked about this, and our conclusion was that

1) there's a difference between clock _skew_ (spans being out of sync with each other) and clock _drift_, (the spans being in sync with each other, but somehow wildly off from our clock, such that a new transaction reads as having happened weeks ago) which is what I believe you're talking about,

2) relay doesn't correct skew but it does correct drift, but

3) the former was worth documenting but the latter was not, because skew is much more likely and much more noticeable, whereas drift severe enough to make us change it was going to be very rare.

Does any of that go against what you know and/or, do you think we should document drift as well as skew?

> Because there is no way for Sentry to judge either the relative or absolute accuracy of your timestamps, it does not attempt to correct for this. And while you can reduce clock skew by using Network Time Protocol (NTP) or your cloud provider's clock synchronization services, you may still notice small discrepancies in your data, as synchronizing clocks on small intervals is challenging.

Reviewer 5: Long story short, we can avoid all this by not making claims about what Sentry does or does not, as that's an implementation detail that can easily change.

```suggestion
We suggest you use the Network Time Protocol (NTP) or your cloud provider's clock synchronization services to reduce clock skew.
```

<details>
<summary>Details</summary>

1. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clock_drift & https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clock_skew
2. The source code links I shared use the name "drift", but I don't think it matches the definition of clock drift. It corrects for the **skew** between the client clock and the clock of the Relay server (however somehow ignoring the data transfer and processing time). In practice, for JS transactions at the moment we never send the `sent_at` value, thus Relay does:
    ```
    event.start_timestamp += current_time_at_normalization_time - event.timestamp
    ```
    and
    ```
    event.timestamp += current_time_at_normalization_time - event.timestamp
    ```

    This is equivalent to:
    ```
    event.timestamp = current_time_at_normalization_time
    event.start_timestamp = event.timestamp - duration
    ```

    (Unless I'm reading the Relay code wrong!)
3. --

My comment was re:

> Because there is no way for Sentry to judge either the relative or absolute accuracy of your timestamps, it does not attempt to correct for this.

In fact, we DO judge the RELATIVE accuracy of the timestamps AND DO attempt to correct the timestamps. We always do it, for every ingested transaction.

---

**Food for thought**

I've discussed the Relay implementation with Markus before... if your multiple servers have their clocks well synced and produce trustworthy timestamps, but all have quite different latencies sending data to Relay (or even more simply -- Relay has a non-constant processing time), then the "correction" in Relay may really be mixing up the relative timeframes of transactions in a trace.

https://github.com/getsentry/relay/issues/534

</details>

> Because there is no way for Sentry to judge either the relative or absolute accuracy of your timestamps, it does not attempt to correct for this. And while you can reduce clock skew by using Network Time Protocol (NTP) or your cloud provider's clock synchronization services, you may still notice small discrepancies in your data, as synchronizing clocks on small intervals is challenging.

Author: Ah, all good to know, thank you! And you do raise an interesting food-for-thought question...

But yes, long story short, I think your suggestion to just not mention it is a good one.

> **What We Send**

Author: I agree that could be clearer. Changed to `How Data is Sent`, since it's about spans as well as transactions.

> Individual spans aren't sent to Sentry. Rather, those spans are attached to their containing transaction, and the transaction is sent as one unit. This means that no span data will be recorded by Sentry's servers until the transaction to which they belong is closed and dispatched. 

Reviewer 6: M: Should we write one sentence to make it clear that we would also send a single span if it's the root span?

Author: Aren't we still sending a transaction, then, since it's the root? It's gotta be the root of something...

That said, yeah, it might be worth noting that you don't need to have any span _other_ than the root in order for a transaction to be valid.

Author: Okay, added.

> Individual spans aren't sent to Sentry. Rather, those spans are attached to their containing transaction, and the transaction is sent as one unit. This means that no span data will be recorded by Sentry's servers until the transaction to which they belong is closed and dispatched. 

Author: Isn't it the case, though, that a span which isn't part of a transaction (in other words, doesn't have `transaction` set and doesn't have an ancestor with `transaction` sent) gets dropped? ([Here](https://github.com/getsentry/sentry-javascript/blob/cf2bc7e1264f1b5a74e6e9dae4d4ebf5367632ea/packages/apm/src/span.ts#L287-L290) is where that happens, I believe.) So I feel like it is important, so that those manually instrumenting their code know that they have to create a transaction in order for their stuff to get recorded, no?

And you may be right - it may be temporary, though I was under the impression that sending individual spans involved enough overhead that we didn't ever want to do it. I could easily be wrong, though. @HazAT - care to weigh in?

To your theoretical example, I'd argue that in that case we're still only sending transactions, because once you break it down like that, each span becomes its own transaction, which would radically change what you see in the UI.

> Individual spans aren't sent to Sentry. Rather, those spans are attached to their containing transaction, and the transaction is sent as one unit. This means that no span data will be recorded by Sentry's servers until the transaction to which they belong is closed and dispatched. 

Reviewer 5: > So I feel like it is important, so that those manually instrumenting their code know that they have to create a transaction in order for their stuff to get recorded, no?

Yes, that's why we say "the transaction is sent as one unit"; "no span data will be recorded by Sentry's servers until the transaction to which they belong is closed and dispatched".

"Individual spans aren't sent to Sentry." is true today, but felt to me redundant and over specific, that's why I suggested the edit.

> Individual spans aren't sent to Sentry. Rather, those spans are attached to their containing transaction, and the transaction is sent as one unit. This means that no span data will be recorded by Sentry's servers until the transaction to which they belong is closed and dispatched. 

Author: I think I meant it as a little bit of a warning/debugging hint, also, like, 'Hey, wondering why your spans aren't showing up in Sentry? This is why."

I tightened up the wording a bit, though, so hopefully it will read as less redundant.

## Data Sampling

> When you enable sampling in your tracing setup, you choose a percentage of collected transactions to send to Sentry. For example, if you had an endpoint that received 1000 requests per minute, a sampling rate of 0.25 would result in approximately 250 transactions (25%) being sent to Sentry. (The number is approximate because each request is either tracked or not, independently and pseudorandomly, with a 25% probability. So in the same way that 100 fair coins, when flipped, result in approximately 50 heads, the SDK will "decide" to collect a trace in approximately 250 cases.) Because you know the sampling percentage, you can then extrapolate your total traffic volume.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
When you enable sampling in your tracing setup, you choose a percentage of collected transactions to send to Sentry. For example, if you had an endpoint that received 1000 requests per minute, a sampling rate of `0.25` would result in approximately 250 transactions (25%) being sent to Sentry. (The number is approximate because each request is either tracked or not, independently and pseudorandomly, with a 25% probability. So in the same way that 100 fair coins, when flipped, result in approximately 50 heads, the SDK will "decide" to collect a trace in approximately 250 cases.) Because you know the sampling percentage, you can then extrapolate your total traffic volume.
```

Reviewer 6: Hard to read my change, I just added backticks around `0.25`

Author: ✔️

> When you enable sampling in your tracing setup, you choose a percentage of collected transactions to send to Sentry. For example, if you had an endpoint that received 1000 requests per minute, a sampling rate of 0.25 would result in approximately 250 transactions (25%) being sent to Sentry. (The number is approximate because each request is either tracked or not, independently and pseudorandomly, with a 25% probability. So in the same way that 100 fair coins, when flipped, result in approximately 50 heads, the SDK will "decide" to collect a trace in approximately 250 cases.) Because you know the sampling percentage, you can then extrapolate your total traffic volume.

Author: Yup, that's more accurate, you're right. Added.

> When collecting traces, we **strongly recommend** sampling your data, for two reasons. First, though capturing a single trace involves minimal overhead, capturing traces for every single pageload, or every single API request, has the potential to add an undesirable amount of load to your system. Second, by enabling sampling you'll more easily prevent yourself from exceeding your organization's [event quota]({%- link _documentation/accounts/quotas/index.md -%}), which will help you manage costs.

Author: Ah, yeah. I even went so far as to google if "pageload" can be used as a compound adjective (I found nothing directly addressing the question, but "page load" does seem to be  _far_ more prevalent than "pageload"), but then never actually made a decision and fixed it. 🤦🏻‍♀️ Thanks for catching that.

@PeloWriter - Given that "pageload" seems not to really be a thing, my instinct is to say that "watching the _page load_" (noun followed by verb) gets a space, and that "the _page-load_ transaction" (compound adjective) gets a dash. Does that sound reasonable to you?

Will assume that's good for the moment, and that way at least they'll all be consistent and easy to find if you have a different idea.

When choosing a sampling rate, the goal is to not collect _too_ much data (given the reasons above) but also to collect enough data that you are able to draw meaningful conclusions. If you're not sure what rate to choose, we recommend starting with a low value and gradually increasing it as you learn more about your traffic patterns and volume, until you've found a rate which lets you balance performance and cost concerns with data accuracy.

> ### Consistency Within a Trace

Reviewer 8: 👏 ty this helped me understand this concept way better

Author: 🎉 

Great! Glad to hear it!

> For traces that involve multiple transactions, Sentry uses a "head-based" approach: a sampling decision is made in the originating service, and then that decision is passed to all subsequent services. To see how this works, let's return to our webapp example above. Consider two users, A and B, who are both loading your app in their respective browsers. When A loads the app, the SDK pseudorandomly "decides" to collect a trace, whereas when B loads the app, the SDK "decides" not to. When each browser makes requests to your backend, it includes in those requests the "yes, please collect transactions" or the "no, not collecting transactions this time" decision in the headers. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For traces that involve multiple transactions, Sentry uses a "head-based" approach: a sampling decision is made in the originating service, and then that decision is passed to all subsequent services. To see how this works, let's return to our webapp example above. Consider two users, A and B, who are both loading your app in their respective browsers. When A loads the app, the SDK pseudorandomly "decides" to collect a trace, whereas when B loads the app, the SDK "decides" not to. When each browser makes requests to your backend, it includes in those requests the "yes, please collect transactions" or the "no, don't collect transactions this time" decision in the headers. 
```

Author: ✔️

On the other hand, when your backend processes the requests from B's browser, it sees the "no" decision, and as a result it does _not_ collect and send transaction and span data to Sentry. It does, however, do the same thing it does in A's case in terms of propagating the decision to subsequent services, telling them not to collect or send data either. They then in turn tell any services they call not to send data, and in this way no transactions from B's trace are collected.

Put simply: as a result of this head-based approach, where the decision is made once in the originating service and passed to all subsequent services, either all of the transactions for a given trace are collected, or none are, so there shouldn't be any incomplete traces.

### Consistency Between Traces

> If you enable tracing in services with multiple entry points, we recommend choosing similar sampling rates, to avoid biasing your data. For example, suppose the backend of our on-going webapp example also serves as a public API. In that case, some traces would start with a pageload transaction in the web app, and likely include multiple backend transactions, while other traces (those representing folks hitting the public API) would begin with a single backend request transaction, which would be the only backend transaction in the trace. Choosing a very different sampling rate for your web app from that chosen for your backend would lead to one of those scenarios being oversampled compared to the other, compromising the accuracy of your overall data.

Author: Yeah - that all makes a ton of sense. This is an example of me rewriting and fleshing out content which previously existed. Here how the idea is expressed in the current docs:

` If your services have multiple entry points, you should aim to choose a consistent sampling rate for each. Choosing different sampling rates can bias your results.`

Perhaps @dashed or @markstory can address this question?

> If you enable tracing in services with multiple entry points, we recommend choosing similar sampling rates, to avoid biasing your data. For example, suppose the backend of our on-going webapp example also serves as a public API. In that case, some traces would start with a pageload transaction in the web app, and likely include multiple backend transactions, while other traces (those representing folks hitting the public API) would begin with a single backend request transaction, which would be the only backend transaction in the trace. Choosing a very different sampling rate for your web app from that chosen for your backend would lead to one of those scenarios being oversampled compared to the other, compromising the accuracy of your overall data.

Reviewer: That makes sense to me. 

@rhcarvalho brings up a good point that data should be analyzed in isolation if sampling rates at various sources differ.

> If you enable tracing in services with multiple entry points, we recommend choosing similar sampling rates, to avoid biasing your data. For example, suppose the backend of our on-going webapp example also serves as a public API. In that case, some traces would start with a pageload transaction in the web app, and likely include multiple backend transactions, while other traces (those representing folks hitting the public API) would begin with a single backend request transaction, which would be the only backend transaction in the trace. Choosing a very different sampling rate for your web app from that chosen for your backend would lead to one of those scenarios being oversampled compared to the other, compromising the accuracy of your overall data.

Author: So what's the consensus here? Should I

1. Take out this part entirely, since it might not be great advice,

or

2. Modify it so that the focus is not consistent rates but on data bias in general when you have multiple entry points, and mention Rodolfo's tags idea

?

> If you enable tracing in services with multiple entry points, we recommend choosing similar sampling rates, to avoid biasing your data. For example, suppose the backend of our on-going webapp example also serves as a public API. In that case, some traces would start with a pageload transaction in the web app, and likely include multiple backend transactions, while other traces (those representing folks hitting the public API) would begin with a single backend request transaction, which would be the only backend transaction in the trace. Choosing a very different sampling rate for your web app from that chosen for your backend would lead to one of those scenarios being oversampled compared to the other, compromising the accuracy of your overall data.

Reviewer: @rhcarvalho do you something specific that can be changed? Otherwise, we can keep this for now and address it later once we have a more concrete opinion on this.

> If you enable tracing in services with multiple entry points, we recommend choosing similar sampling rates, to avoid biasing your data. For example, suppose the backend of our on-going webapp example also serves as a public API. In that case, some traces would start with a pageload transaction in the web app, and likely include multiple backend transactions, while other traces (those representing folks hitting the public API) would begin with a single backend request transaction, which would be the only backend transaction in the trace. Choosing a very different sampling rate for your web app from that chosen for your backend would lead to one of those scenarios being oversampled compared to the other, compromising the accuracy of your overall data.

Reviewer 5: > Maybe the use of `tags` could be helpful to filter each data set?

We only filter on transaction name for now, so the `tags` advice is not immediately useful.

I don't want to slow this PR down, so we can track the discussion in #1678.

## Viewing Trace Data

> You can see a list of transaction events by clicking on the "Transactions" pre-built query in [Discover]({%- link _documentation/performance/discover/index.md -%}), or by using a search condition `event.type:transaction` in the [Discover Query Builder]({%- link _documentation/performance/discover/query-builder.md -%}) view.

Author: Hmmm. Probably.

Since that's a slightly bigger change than just tweaking wording here or there, I'm inclined to file a docsme ticket for it, just so that this PR isn't blocked on it. Lemme know if you think it's important it be added now.

> You can see a list of transaction events by clicking on the "Transactions" pre-built query in [Discover]({%- link _documentation/performance/discover/index.md -%}), or by using a search condition `event.type:transaction` in the [Discover Query Builder]({%- link _documentation/performance/discover/query-builder.md -%}) view.

Author: Okay, made an Asana task.

### Transaction List View

> The results of either of the above queries are presented in a list view, where each entry represents a group of one or more transactions. Data about each group is displayed in table form, and comes in two flavors: value-based (such as transaction name), and aggregate (such as average duration). The choice of which kinds of data to display is configurable, and can be changed by clicking 'Edit Columns' at the top right of the table. Bear in mind that adding or removing any value-based columns may affect the way the results are grouped.

Reviewer 7: This is actually one of 3 major views that the above query will show. 
1) The list view.
2) A timeseries graph showing the aggregates of the query over time.
3) A tag summary that shows the top tags associated with the events in the list view.

I think it's worth at least mentioning the timeseries graph, since there are a bunch of interesting features relevant to tracing: you can see any of the aggregates in your query graphed over time, overlay the results from the previous period or release markers, and see a breakdown of the top 5 results in the list view.

Author: Okay. I was hoping to avoid going into too much detail here (since the full Discover interface is covered in the linked docs), but I'm happy to add a sentence or two.

Reviewer 7: Oh I see your point. OK well if you want to keep it terse here I think that's fine. I do think the timeseries graph is very useful but I do know it's documented separately.

Author: I added a few sentences, and mentioned both the graph and the tag summary.

From this view, you can also filter the transactions list, both by restricting the time window and by adding attributes to the query.

> _Note:_ Currently, only transaction data - the transaction name and any attributes the transaction inherits from its root span - is searchable. Data contained in spans other than the root span is not indexed and therefore is not searched.

Author: Changed it to "...is not indexed and therefore cannot be searched." in order to not have two sentences in a row end with "is (not) searchable."

> Full documentation of the transaction list view (which is just a special case of the Discover query builder) can be found [here]({%- link _documentation/performance/discover/query-builder.md -%}). 

Author: ✔️

#### Performance Metrics

A number of the metrics available as column choices lend themselves well to analyzing your application's performance.

**Transaction Duration Metrics**

The following functions aggregate transaction durations:

> - average

Reviewer 3: We also have max()

Author: ✔️

- various percentiles (by default, the pre-built Transactions query shows the 75th and 95th percentiles, but there are many other options, including a custom percentile)

One use case for tracking these statistics is to help you identify transactions that are slower than your organization's target SLAs.

> A word of caution when looking at averages and percentiles: In most cases, you'll want to set up tracing so that only [a fraction](#data-sampling) of possible traces are actually sent to Sentry, to avoid overwhelming your system. Further, you may want to filter your transaction data by date or other factors, or you may be tracing a relatively uncommon operation. For all of these reasons, you may end up with average and percentile data that is directionally correct, but not accurate. (To use the most extreme case as an example, if only a single transaction matches your filters, you can still compute an "average" duration, even though that's clearly not what is usually meant by "average.")

Author: Will wait on @PeloWriter to weigh in here.

> A word of caution when looking at averages and percentiles: In most cases, you'll want to set up tracing so that only [a fraction](#data-sampling) of possible traces are actually sent to Sentry, to avoid overwhelming your system. Further, you may want to filter your transaction data by date or other factors, or you may be tracing a relatively uncommon operation. For all of these reasons, you may end up with average and percentile data that is directionally correct, but not accurate. (To use the most extreme case as an example, if only a single transaction matches your filters, you can still compute an "average" duration, even though that's clearly not what is usually meant by "average.")

Reviewer 4: see previous note. I'd capitalize here, too.

> A word of caution when looking at averages and percentiles: In most cases, you'll want to set up tracing so that only [a fraction](#data-sampling) of possible traces are actually sent to Sentry, to avoid overwhelming your system. Further, you may want to filter your transaction data by date or other factors, or you may be tracing a relatively uncommon operation. For all of these reasons, you may end up with average and percentile data that is directionally correct, but not accurate. (To use the most extreme case as an example, if only a single transaction matches your filters, you can still compute an "average" duration, even though that's clearly not what is usually meant by "average.")

Author: ✔️

The problem of small sample size (and the resulting inability to be usefully accurate) will happen more often for some metrics than others, and sample size will also vary by row. For example, it takes less data to calculate a meaningful average than it does to calculate an equally meaningful 95th percentile. Further, a row representing requests to `/settings/my-awesome-org/` will likely contain many times as many transactions as one representing requests to `/settings/my-awesome-org/projects/best-project-ever/`.

**Transaction Frequency Metrics**

The following functions aggregate transaction counts and the rate at which transactions are recorded:

- count
- count unique values (for a given field)
- average requests (transactions) per second
- average requests (transactions) per minute

> Each of these functions is calculated with respect to the collection of transactions within the given row, which means the numbers will change as you filter your data or change the time window. Also, if you have set up your SDK to [sample your data](#data-sampling), remember that only the transactions that are sent to Sentry are counted. So if a row containing transactions representing requests to a given endpoint is calculated to be receiving 5 requests per second, and you've got a 25% sampling rate enabled, in reality you're getting approximately 20 (5 * 4) requests to that endpoint each second.

Author: Yeah, I worried a little bit about that, too, but I felt like dividing by a fraction would wig people out. (People are enormous math wimps.)

How about this?

`So if a row containing transactions representing requests to a given endpoint is calculated to be receiving 5 requests per second, and you've got a 25% sampling rate enabled, in reality you're getting approximately 20 requests to that endpoint each second. (20 because you're sampling 25% - or 1/4 - of your data, so your real volume is 4 times what you're seeing in Sentry.)`

> Each of these functions is calculated with respect to the collection of transactions within the given row, which means the numbers will change as you filter your data or change the time window. Also, if you have set up your SDK to [sample your data](#data-sampling), remember that only the transactions that are sent to Sentry are counted. So if a row containing transactions representing requests to a given endpoint is calculated to be receiving 5 requests per second, and you've got a 25% sampling rate enabled, in reality you're getting approximately 20 (5 * 4) requests to that endpoint each second.

Reviewer 5: Works for me.

### Transaction Detail View

> When you open a transaction event in Discover (by clicking on the icon at the left side of the row), you'll see the **span view** at the top of the page. Other information the SDK captured as part of the transaction event (such as the transaction's tags and automatically collected breadcrumbs) is displayed underneath and to the right of the span view.

Author: Yeah, that conversation was me, LOL - I wanted to know if the transaction name was going to be clickable, because I didn't find clicking the icon particularly intuitive, and it took me a sec to figure out how to open up the transaction. The answer I got was that they'd thought about it and decided no, since you can change the order of the columns, and so the icon was going to remain the way in (along with, perhaps, something in the row's context menu).

So yeah, as a matter of principle I totally agree with you - this is also why I'm not super hot on screenshots, because they're nearly impossible to keep up to date. In this case, though, I felt like mentioning the icon was warranted just because it felt so non-obvious to me. What do you think?

Also @dashed @markstory - do you have any thoughts here, since this is your area of expertise?

> When you open a transaction event in Discover (by clicking on the icon at the left side of the row), you'll see the **span view** at the top of the page. Other information the SDK captured as part of the transaction event (such as the transaction's tags and automatically collected breadcrumbs) is displayed underneath and to the right of the span view.

Reviewer: I think this is fine for now. 

Today, the span view can only be viewed in one singular page in the Sentry product; and that is within the Discover details page.

The objective of this paragraph was to briefly describe where developers can find the span view.

> When you open a transaction event in Discover (by clicking on the icon at the left side of the row), you'll see the **span view** at the top of the page. Other information the SDK captured as part of the transaction event (such as the transaction's tags and automatically collected breadcrumbs) is displayed underneath and to the right of the span view.

Author: 👍🏻

#### Using the Span View

The span view is a split view where the left-hand side shows the transaction's span tree, and the right-hand side represents each span as a colored rectangle. Within the tree view, Sentry identifies spans by their `op` and `description` values. If a span doesn't have a description, Sentry uses the span's id as a fallback. The first span listed is always the transaction's root span, from which all other spans in the transaction descend.

At the top of the span view is a minimap, which shows which specific portion of the transaction you're viewing.

**Zooming In on a Transaction**

As shown in the Discover span screenshot above, you can click and drag your mouse cursor across the minimap (top of the span view). You can also adjust the window selection by dragging the handlebars (black dashed lines). 

**Missing Instrumentation**

Sentry may indicate that gaps between spans are "Missing Instrumentation." This means that there is time in the transaction that isn't accounted for by any of the transaction's spans, and likely means that you need to manually instrument that part of your process.

**Viewing Span Details**

> Clicking on a row in the span view to expands the details of that span. From here, you can see all attached properties, such as tags and data.

Author: ✔️

[{% asset performance/span-detail-view.png alt="Span detail view shows the span id, trace id, parent span id, and other data such as tags." %}]({% asset performance/span-detail-view.png @path %})

**Search by Trace ID**

You can search for all of the transactions in a given trace by expanding any of the span details and clicking on "Search by Trace".

_Note:_ On the Team plan, results will only be shown for one project at a time. Further, each transaction belongs to a specific project, and you will only be able to see transactions belonging to projects you have permission to view. Therefore, you may not see all transactions in a given trace in your results list.

**Traversing to Child Transactions**

Some spans within a transaction may be the parent of another transaction. When you expand the span details for such spans, you'll see the "View Child" button, which, when clicked, will lead to the child transaction's details view.

> _Note:_ Traversing between transactions in this way is only available on the Business plan. Further, each transaction belongs to a specific project, and you will only be able to see the "View Child" button if the child transaction belongs to a project you have permission to view.

Author: Not a terrible idea.

@PeloWriter - I checked and there's only one spot (the two alerts pages) where we actually do this. Is it something we want to do a) at all, and b) consistently?

> _Note:_ Traversing between transactions in this way is only available on the Business plan. Further, each transaction belongs to a specific project, and you will only be able to see the "View Child" button if the child transaction belongs to a project you have permission to view.

Reviewer 4: We have to be careful to not seem like we're selling in Docs. It's a source of truth; a place where we tell people the goodness they can experience. That bering said, there's no marketing language here, and we are simply providing them with a convenient link. I'd say we can add it.

> _Note:_ Traversing between transactions in this way is only available on the Business plan. Further, each transaction belongs to a specific project, and you will only be able to see the "View Child" button if the child transaction belongs to a project you have permission to view.

Author: ✔️

**Manual Instrumentation**

> To manually instrument certain regions of your code, you can create a transaction to capture them.

Reviewer 8: Should we explain here that `start_span` actually starts a transaction, and that `item.get_transaction()` would be some sort of string representing the `item`?

I'd even update the code snippet to look more like:

```python
import sentry_sdk

while True:
    item = get_from_queue()
    with sentry_sdk.start_span(op="task", transaction="process.{}".format(item.description)):
        # process_item may create more spans internally (see next examples)
        process_item(item)
```

Author: None of this section has been touched. That's the next project. 😊

So, we're on the same page (metaphorically as well as literally!), but that's for another PR.

To send traces, you will need to set the `tracesSampleRate` to a nonzero value. The configuration above will capture 25% of your transactions.

> You can pass many different options to the Tracing integration (as an object of the form `{optionName: value}`), but it comes with reasonable defaults out of the box. It will automatically capture a trace for every page load. Within that transaction, spans are instrumented for the following operations:

Author: Yup, agreed. This is the section I didn't look at yet, so much will change, but in the meantime, you're right that this does bring it more in line with the above.

> You can pass many different options to the Tracing integration (as an object of the form `{optionName: value}`), but it comes with reasonable defaults out of the box. It will automatically capture a trace for every page load. Within that transaction, spans are instrumented for the following operations:

Author: (Changed it there and in the Python section.)

**Using Tracing Integration for Manual Instrumentation**

> The tracing integration will create a transaction on page load by default; all spans that are created will be attached to it. Also, the integration will finish the transaction after the default timeout of 500ms of inactivity. The page is considered inactive if there are no pending XHR/fetch requests. If you want to extend the transaction's lifetime, you can do so by adding more spans to it. The following is an example of how you could profile a React component:

Author: ✔️

}
```

This example will send a transaction `shopCheckout` to Sentry, containing all outgoing requests that happen in `validateShoppingCartOnServer` as spans. The transaction will also contain a `task` span that measures how long `processAndValidateShoppingCart` took. Finally, the call to `ApmIntegrations.Tracing.finishIdleTransaction()` will finish the transaction and send it to Sentry. Calling this is optional; if it is not called, the integration will automatically send the transaction itself after the defined `idleTimeout` (default 500ms).

**What is an activity?**

The concept of an activity only exists in the `Tracing` integration in JavaScript Browser. It's a helper that tells the integration how long it should keep the `IdleTransaction` alive. An activity can be pushed and popped. Once all activities of an `IdleTransaction` have been popped, the `IdleTransaction` will be sent to Sentry.

**Manual Transactions**

> To manually instrument a certain region of your code, you can create a transaction to capture it.

Reviewer 8: same as above `item.getTransaction()` is very hand wavy as to what one passes into `transaction`. And given that the function name is `startSpan` implies that there's a transaction object to pass around

Author: Same as above. Stay tuned!

**Adding Additional Spans to the Transaction**

> The next example contains the implementation of the hypothetical `processItem ` function called from the code snippet in the previous section. Our SDK can determine if there is currently an open transaction and add to it all newly created spans as child operations. Keep in mind that each individual span needs to be manually finished; otherwise, that span will not show up in the transaction.

Author: Yeah, those are all over, and making the linter mad (hence our entire conversation yesterday about the trimming trailing spaces option). To reduce noise, was planning to just do a bulk fix (across the whole repo) separately.

**Adding Additional Spans to the Transaction**

> The next example contains the implementation of the hypothetical `processItem ` function called from the code snippet in the previous section. Our SDK can determine if there is currently an open transaction and add to it all newly created spans as child operations. Keep in mind that each individual span needs to be manually finished; otherwise, that span will not show up in the transaction.

Author: Same as above.
